# vcf2fasta

> Note that this repo is *no longer maintained*.

**Major release. Current version should now work with haploid, diploid, phased, and unphased (IUPAC) outputs.**

vcf2fasta.py is Python program that extracts FASTA alignments from VCF files given a GFF file with feature coordinates and a reference FASTA file.

## Preprocessing

The reference must be indexed using:

```
samtools faidx ref.fa
```

And the VCF file should be tabix indexed and compressed:

```
bgzip my_vcf_file.vcf
tabix my_vcf_file.vcf.gz
```

For most GFF3 formats, no modification is needed for the GFF file if the structure follow [Ensembl](https://m.ensembl.org/info/website/upload/gff3.html). However, it is important to keep the whole structure of the GFF file, including complete gene features. If CDSs are the focus they should be accompanied by it's corresponding gene or parent feature:

* gene
* CDS/exon

Similarly of the focus are introns:

* gene
* intron

Or transcripts:

* gene
* transcript

etc.. Alternatively, all features can be left on the GFF. However, the `--feat | -e` argument must be used at all times.

**If multiple transcript isoforms are on the GFF, all of them will be fetched.**

## Requirements
* `pysam`
* `art`

```bash
pip3 install pysam art
```

## Options
Run with `-h` option for more details

```
usage: vcf2fasta.py [-h] --fasta GENOME --vcf VCF --gff GFF --feat FEAT
                    [--blend] [--inframe] [--out OUT] [--addref] [--skip]

        Converts regions/intervals in the genome into FASTA alignments
        provided a VCF file, a GFF file, and FASTA reference.

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  --fasta GENOME, -f GENOME
                        FASTA file with the reference genome.
  --vcf VCF, -v VCF     a tabix-indexed VCF file.
  --gff GFF, -g GFF     GFF file.
  --feat FEAT, -e FEAT  feature/annotation in the GFF file. (i.e. gene, CDS, intron)
  --blend, -b           concatenate GFF entries of FEAT into a single alignment. Useful for CDS. (default: False)
  --inframe, -i         force the first codon of the sequence to be inframe. Useful for incomplete CDS. (default: False)
  --out OUT, -o OUT     provide a name for the output directory (optional)
  --addref, -r          include the reference sequence in the FASTA alignment (default: False)
  --skip, -s            skips features without variants (default: False)

        All files must be indexed. So before running the code make sure
        that your reference FASTA file is indexed:

        samtools faidx genome.fas

        BGZIP compress and TABIX index your VCF file:

        bgzip variants.vcf
        tabix variants.vcf.gz

        The GFF file does not need to be indexed.

        examples:
        python vcf2fasta.py -f genome.fas -v variants.vcf.gz -g intervals.gff -e CDS
```

If running on CDS use the `--blend | -b` option to concatenate coding sequences. Otherwise it will spit out FASTA alignments for each CDS.


# Old instructions for the Perl version

**Note: this script only works with SNPs and not indel variants**
**Use the Python version for consistency**

# vcf2fasta.pl
Converts a VCF file to a FASTA alignment provided a reference genome and a GFF file

Given a FASTA reference genome, a multi-sample VCF file and a GFF file, this script will generate FASTA alignments of any feature found in the GFF file; for instance, coding sequences (CDS). Gene names will be taken from the first id in field 9 of the GFF. It is important that the GFF file is sorted by position. The script will take diploid, phased, and/or haploid data. It is important to note that the script currently only takes very standard VCF formats; for instance, those generated by haplotype-based algorithms (HaplotypeCaller and FreeBayes), which include gaps and multi-nucleotide variants, will not work.

## Installation

    git clone https://github.com/santiagosnchez/vcf2fasta
    cd vcf2fasta
    chmod +x vcf2fasta.pl
    sudo cp vcf2fasta.pl /usr/local/bin

## Running the code

Use the `-h` flag for more details:

    perl vcf2fasta.pl -h
    Usage:
    perl vcf2fasta.pl -f <fasta-ref> -v <vcf-file> -g <gff-file> -e <gff-feature> [ --ref ] [ --phased ]
    
    option --ref will include the reference sequence.
    option --phase informs the program that the VCF is pased.
    defaults ignore the two options.
    
    examples:
    perl vcf2fasta.pl -f ref.fas -v snps.vcf -g annotation.gff -e CDS
    perl vcf2fasta.pl -f ref.fas -v snps.phased.vcf -g annotation.gff -e CDS --phased
    perl vcf2fasta.pl -f ref.fas -v snps.phased.vcf -g annotation.gff -e CDS --phased --ref
